---
title: "Post_partum_recovery"
---
>Go back to the [Pregnancy, Gestation & Post partum](Pregnancy,%20Gestation%20&%20Post%20partum.md) corridor
>Go back to [the castle entrerance](_index.md)

### Post partum recovery
> #### Introduction
>In the past I had always helped women randomly throughout their pregnancy or post partum phases and was even privileged enough to be brought in late in the gestational process to help with end of term mother and fetus health/development in preparation for the big day! Then I had 2 kids and this process became so interesting to me that I spent WAY too many hours reading as much as I could and paying gestational, lactation, and pregnancy experts to have consult calls with myself purely for the sake of education. Then 2021 began and all of a sudden I began working with so many couples either helping them get pregnant in the first place, helping the wife to recover post partum, and everything in between! THIS really started hitting an emotional chord in my heart because I feel like I started truly helping the new children and parents of this world in a way that I wished someone had done for me whenever we had our first child. Over the last 2 weeks I have been a part of 12 different couples births and grateful, doesnt quite fully describe how much it means to me that I CAN make a difference in these people’s lives! As this has turned into a big niche coaching service of mine, I wanted to begin posting more education on the topic matter so that parents can be better prepared for the pregnancy, the birthing process, and the post partum period all the way into early child developmental years!

> #### Probably not what you expect!
> This first post is going to start off talking about post partum recovery and probably isn’t going to be what you think post partum recovery looks like. But, lets scroll back to end of term and recognize that if you had a vaginal delivery or a C-section, that is going to massive change things in multiple ways. First off you have to know that during labor, oxytocin, epinephrine, norepinephrine, prolactin, and beta endorphins are going to be major players from the biochemical cascades involved. Oxytocin for example, contracts the uterus and promotes labor to progress. If our not contracting enough they will obviously apply this IV via a Pitocin drip (and if there is an epidural involved then the solution is typically a blend of ropivacaine and fentanyl, but that’s a topic for a different post.) Either way, depending on if you have a vaginal or C-Section based delivery, will completely dictate the hormonal environment you are in for the following week +. On top of the hormonal alterations that occur based on the style of delivery, we have the physical, emotional, and mental trauma induced during labor - this varies DRASTICALLY from person to person to context is everything (some people are in labor for 24 hours and push for 60+ mins while others are in labor for 3 hours, push 3 times, and out pops the new baby.) If your following along so far, you’ll realize there is a LOT to consider before you even ask the question “what’s the best way to recover post partum?”

  
> #### The timeline of Post partum recovery
> Post partum recovery begins SECONDS after having your baby and carries all the way over until potentially 6-12 weeks later (or more depending on the scenario.)
>
> ##### First
> We have those immediate seconds after having birth where skin to skin time is essential. Not only for your own biochemical and hormonal cascades to begin to flux the way we want them to, but for your child as well (obviously this will be slightly modified if a C-Section is done.)
>
> ##### Second 
> after the initial skin to skin contact occurs the kidneys, liver, ventilatory systems, everything begins to spark within the newly born child just as the mother begins to alter her own hormonal environment (because remember there are usually other pharmaceutical interventions in the mix that you have to account for also!) So, drugs begin to come down in the mother and pain medication is on an as needed basis - usually the acetaminophen and ibuprofen rotation. Depending on the severity of the labor and delivery, you should be forced to get up and move around even if only for brief moments within hours (obviously there are extenuating circumstances.) But in general, your second order of action is to be a bit more mobile as your hormones begin to slowly normalize and your milk comes in (if it hasn’t already.)
>
> ##### Third
> Lets assume that you, baby, and hubby all recovered well enough and you go ahead 48-72 hours later (I would recommend 72 hours + as that extra bit of aid in the hospital can come in handy if you do not have family to help you but again, this is situation specific and dependent.) So now we are 72 hours later or so, we get home, and now the transition into sleep deprivation and a messed up circadian rhythm begins. This is your 3rd biggest part of post partum recovery, learning to deal with an irregular circadian rhythm with sleep deprivation. With your child, you need to ensure your getting them back to birth weight (as they will lose weight from time of birth until the time you get them home) within the first 1-2 weeks (the sooner, usually the better.) Obviously this means getting 8+ feeding in per day based on their bodyweight (I posted a chart a while back denoting this so search back for that info.) So initially you will have to get up in the middle of the night to feed your child while means you are going to be chronically sleep deprived, as such, the husband needs to understand your job is keeping that baby alive and healthy and he needs to do everything else (seriously.) So hubby takes care of everything else and you just focus on trying to stay sane as your hormones continue to flux and you feed your child continuously. This third step will be called the circadian step as you are trying to slowly transition your child into a proper circadian environment so that they will be up all day and sleep all night. This begins with both of you getting outside for even 5-10 minutes every morning as the sun is rising. Let the sun hit both of your faces, trigger that SCN cascade, and you’ve already begun! Throughout the day if you are able to get outside and get more sun and environmental exposure for the two of you, it will not only benefit your child’s brain’s development but also work to bring you into a more parasympathetic state with a lower HR, BP, and take away some of that initial constant vigilance that occurs. Then, we get to night time and its time to turn off all the lights, keep noise extremely low, and get their SCN used to a dark quite environment to signal that its time to rest. We then get that awesome melatonin-somatropic release and a vast majority of growth and development occurs in those nocturnal hours.
>
> ##### Fourth
> Now its maybe 4-6 weeks in and your both on a better pattern. Maybe not sleeping throughout the night completely but you have a routine and your beginning to feel a bit more back to normal. Keep in mind post partum depression IS A VERY REAL THING and affects somewhere around 95% + of females so husbands need to take note to talk these things through with your partner and you both need to be very honest about what’s going on mentally and emotionally. But now, physically (depending on the delivery), you are probably ready to get back into working out again! That means initially keeping food volume on the higher side to support breast milk production and then weening calories down and replacing breast milk for formula as you lose bodyfat and milk supply drops off (again this is more so based and timed on the person’s preference for breast feeding or not.) As nutritional tracking comes back into play you can now slowly introduce some higher HR cardio to begin getting aerobic systems and enzymes back to where they need to be!
>
> ##### Fifth
> now lets say your 6-10 weeks in, nutrition and cardio (and aerobic systems) are where they should be, now you can begin getting back into the gym and resistance training! This is a crawl, walk, run scenario so we want to ease into training with an initial introductory/alarm week and then slowly transition into working ourselves back up to the volume and intensity that you were used to pre-pregnancy! Note there will be architectural changes that will alter how you may squat or deadlift for example, but your patterns will shift and it will feel normal in no time! 
>
>  For the sake of this post already being too long, I will end it here, even though this is really ending where our conversation begins of training and nutritional adjustments to make post partum. However, recovery from delivery and pregnancy as a whole is very misunderstood and in reality, begins seconds after birth!